---
title: Nested Identification
subtitle: Re-theorizing Identification in the Cosmopolitan Age
author: Niek van de Pas
date: 2021-03-31 11:00:00 +0200
categories: [Blogging]
tags: [writing]
---

Introduction
============

In recent years, nationalism and national identity have taken center
stage in political debates. In Europe, the proclaimed 'immigration
crisis' have become the bread and butter of a host of right-wing
parties, such as PVV (*Partij voor de Vrijheid,* "Party for Freedom") in
the Netherlands, AfD (*Alternative für Deutschland*, "Alternative for
Germany") in Germany, and *Rassemblement National* (National Rally) in
France, central to which are anti-migration rhetoric and policy. These
parties depart from a set of axioms regarding culture and the
nation-state that Verena Stoclke (1995) has called *cultural
fundamentalism*. Most central among these are the assertion of a clearly
bounded, homogeneous 'host culture' and its fundamental incompatibility
with 'other cultures'. Rhetorically, these axioms are frequently
expressed in terms of 'culture', 'tradition', and 'heritage' (Stolcke,
1995). Since immigration is perceived as a threat to the cultural
homogeneity of the nation, curtails on immigration coupled with
securitized borders are perceived and framed as the solution to this
problem. Although cultural fundamentalism finds perhaps its purest
expression in the new right-wing parties outlined above, it is by no
means unique to them. In fact, though it is not always phrased in
anti-migratory terms, cultural fundamentalism has become the bread and
butter of many European political parties, and its axioms often lurk
below phrases such as 'integration', 'Dutch culture', and 'norms and
values' (see, for example, Centraal Bureau van de Statistiek, 2020 and
CDA, 2021).

In this essay, I relate the thesis of cultural fundamentalism to
cosmopolitan forms of identification by exploring the case of Basque
Country, a region whose relative autonomy has yet failed to silence its
strong nationalist elements. I develop the notion of 'nested
identifications' to understand the various overlapping identifications
that exist in the Basque Country and discuss its implications for the
sociological concept of 'the Other'. First, however, I elucidate my view
on borders and bordering and its relationship to the social world.

The Promise of an Inside: Borders and Identity
==============================================

While they are abstract entities on paper, borders have very real social
implications. Some of these are obvious: since one of the primary
purposes of borders is to 'keep out', some form of border protection is
often assembled, whether in the form of people with guns, walls, or
passport controls (cf. Held, 2002). Some of the implications of borders,
however, are rather less immediate. For instance, the erection of
borders gives rise to an entity within those borders --- on the national
level, a nation-state, which then becomes a totem of identification for
those within its borders. This process of division and attachment can be
found at different spatial scales, from the division of the world into
continents --- a fundamentally arbitrary notion, yet one to which people
ascribe cultural logics --- to the division of soccer stands into 'the
one for the regular folk' and 'the one for the hooligans'.

In this essay, I understand borders as an abstract entity that
represents an attempt to divide endless and unfathomable geographies
into constructs compatible with the limited human mind. The erection of
a geopolitical border, then, represents a promise of an 'inside': a more
or less solidified, homogenous whole, to which we can ascribe particular
characteristics, and which, importantly, form a fundamental constituent
of human identity. The drawing of these borders is dialectical in
nature: how borders are drawn informs our perception of the social
world, which in turn informs how borders are drawn. As such, I view
borders as sites of a tremendous social power which give rise to the
division that is the logical inverse of unity.

The Basque Country, Hybrid Identification, and Cosmopolitanism
==============================================================

It seems to follow, then, that the desire for borders is an
understandable one. The erection of borders creates and legitimizes that
which is inside the borders and opposes it to that which is outside the
borders. One could take this distinction to imply the fundamental
incompatibility between 'inside' and 'outside': the thesis of cultural
fundamentalism. In the following sections, I aim to show the fault in
this line of thinking by examining the region of the Basque Country. In
doing so, I develop a notion of 'hybrid identification', which I relate
to the concept of cosmopolitanism, and discuss the implications this has
for social theory's notion of the 'Other'. Before doing so, however, I
contextualize the discussion by providing a brief overview of the
history of the Basque country.

The phrase 'Basque Country' is an ambiguous one, as it can refer to one
of three things:

-   The greater region of the Basque Country, located in the Western
    Pyrenees, straddling the Franco-Spanish border.

-   The French side of said region (or Northern Basque Country),
    consisting of the provinces of Labourd, Lower Navarre and Soule.

-   The Spanish side of said region (or Southern Basque Country),
    consisting of the Basque Autonomous Community in the West and the
    Chartered Community of Navarre in the East. The former, in turn,
    consists of the three provinces of Álava, Biscay, and Gipuzkoa.

In this essay, the phrase 'Basque Country' is taken to refer to the
Spanish Basque Country, though, as will become clear, the particulars of
the political geography of the nations are somewhat immaterial and
arbitrary. Nevertheless, to contextualize my discussion, I will briefly
sketch the history of the region.

The relationship between the Basque Country and the Spanish government
has long been uneasy. Basque Country, especially the Basque Autonomous
Community, is an economic powerhouse, and is thus of great importance to
Madrid, but the region has seen a long history of cultural and
linguistic suppression, armed conflict, and various calls for
independence. Throughout the Franco regime, Spanish Basque Country was
the victim of significant cultural and linguistic suppression, as the
use of the Basque language in the educational system was banned and the
region was stripped of its special legal status (Calle & Sánchez-Cuenca,
2009, Da Silva, 1975). Since the fall of the Franco regime, however, the
region has regained and retained a substantial amount of autonomy, most
importantly with the ratification of the 1979 Gernika Statute, which
established a local system of parliamentary democracy, vested with
powers over a number of domains, such as taxation and healthcare (The
Statute of Autonomy of the Basque Country, 1979). Nationalist sentiment
persists, however, and the region has been the site of significant
political violence, carried out primarily by the separatist group known
as ETA (*Euskadi Ta Askatasuna*, "Basque Homeland and Liberty"), whose
attacks have claimed the lives of over 800 people (Ministerio del
Interior, 2010).

Having briefly outlined the recent history of the Basque region, its
peoples, and its nationalism, I turn now to a discussion of the
theoretical implications of the three. Upon first examination, Basque
nationalism seems to exist in harmony with the thesis of cultural
fundamentalism. It posits the existence of a homogenous, well-defined
culture --- one legitimized by way of its shared language, cuisine,
customs and traditions, and racial and ethnic makeup --- and makes a
claim for the formal recognition of this culture through the erection of
a more or less autonomous nation-state. Given the (often literal)
violence with which Basque nationalists champion their independence, and
the strong racial and ethnic component with which is frequently ascribed
to 'being Basque' (Jeram, 2013), one would expect Basque nationalists to
follow the playbook of the political parties mentioned in the
introduction to this essay, with anti-migration rhetoric forming a
central element of the party platform. Nothing could be further from the
truth, however: while territorial issues are high on the agenda of
Basque political parties (Llera et al., 2017), surprisingly,
pro-immigrant rhetoric and policy (such as decoupling citizenship and
nationality) are a staple of contemporary Basque nationalist parties
(Jeram, 2013). This apparent paradox is solved when one understands, as
Jeram (2013) allows us to do, that it is exactly through the values of
openness and tolerance that Basque parties attempt to establish a new
national solidarity. Clearly, then, nationalism and isolationism cannot
be understood simply as two sides of the same coin. How, then, should we
attempt to conceptualize Basque nationalism?

A clue to the answer, I believe, is to be found in previous research
into patterns of identification among residents of the Basque Country,
which has shown that many Basque citizens identify as Spanish and
European in addition to being Basque (Filibi Lopez & Ibarra, 2006,
Mansveld Beck, 2008). The same is true in the French Basque region,
where "59% of the populace have mixed French-Basque identifications"
(Mansveld Beck, 2008, p. 382). Indeed, residents of Spanish Basque
Country are members of, at a minimum, five or six legally recognized
levels of political organization: their city, potentially; their
respective province (Álava, Biscay, or Gipuzkoa); the Basque Autonomous
Community, also known as the Southern Basque Country; the Basque Country
as a cultural region, recognized officially through the EU's programs
aimed at the region (Interreg, 2019); the Spanish nation; and the
European Union. While this stratified arrangement of alliances is by no
means unique to the Basque region, it is particularly strong in the
Basque region.

This 'stratified arrangement of alliances' to which I refer gives rise
to what I propose to call nested identification. While layered, hybrid
identities have been studied and recognized before, they have so far
primarily been understood in the context of second and third-generation
immigrants, whose alliance is necessarily a distributed one. In
recognizing the complex and stratified nature of the modern, globalized
world, the concept of nested identification represents an attempt to go
beyond the simple notion of the 'fusion' of two opposite identities,
towards the recognition of the particular nature of each individual's
experience. The concept of nested identification allows us to
understand, or try to understand, the ways in which various identities
intersect and overlap, the ways in which they interact with one another
in particular moments, and the individual's ability to strategically
navigate (cf. Vigh, 2009) their various alliances, deliberately
emphasizing their Spanishness or Europeanness at particular moments.
This, then, entails a form of cosmopolitanism, not in the sense of a
'world citizenship' or an appeal to universal justice, but as a form of
mobility. Chris Rumford (2008) has previously argued that
cosmopolitanism implies "the ability of individuals to cross and
re-cross borders" which "assumes not borderlessness but a proliferation
of borders" (Rumford, 2008, 53). Nested identification, on its part,
implies the ability of individuals to cross and re-cross borders not
literally, but figuratively, choosing to emphasize the locality or
globality of particular borders at particular moments. Borders, then,
become not only a consequence of the fundamental human desire for
Othering, as I have outlined above, but become themselves sites of
tremendous social power. Crucially, it is only through a previously
existing process of 'cosmopolitanization' (Beck, 2002) that nested
identification, as a form of 'cosmopolitanism', is possible at all. In
Beck's view, cosmopolitanization, as a process, refers to the
transformation of everyday identities through globalization from within.
This process of cosmopolitization is coercive: it "is taking place above
the heads of those affected, without their say, and without dialogue or
communicative interaction." (Beck, 2012, p. 11). Nested identification,
then, is ultimately a sociological consequence of the unyielding
globalizing flows which Arjun Appadurai has so eloquently demarcated as
*-scapes* (Appadurai, 1990), as these flows have strengthened the ties
between various levels of socio-political organization.

There are two final points to be made with regards to nested
identification: firstly, it should be clear that, while the Basque
Country presents a particularly interesting site of overlapping
alliances, nested identification is by no means unique to the region.
Secondly, nested identification differs from person to person: some
people may identify very strongly as Basque, and hardly identify as
Spanish (members of the ETA, for instance), while others may identify
very strongly as European and as Spanish. Having outlined this concept,
I now turn to the implications it has for our understanding of 'the
Other'.

Nested Identification and the Other
===================================

In the above, I have argued that what Appadurai (1990) has termed
'*-scapes'* have given rise to a form of cosmopolitanism, one that
entails not a naïve 'world citizenship', but a strategically pliable
union of nested identifications. Here, identifying as Basque, is not the
antithesis to identifying as Spanish, or to identifying as European,
much in the same way that identifying as Basque is not the antithesis to
identifying as Catholic or as bisexual. In this section, I would like to
provide a brief comment on the implications of the concept of nested
identification for the concept of 'the Other'.

If we depart from the thesis of cultural fundamentalism --- that is, if
we assume that cultures are internally consistent, homogeneous, and
bounded, and we assume that these cultures are fundamentally
incompatible with one another --- our conceptual understanding of 'the
Other' remains quite simplistic: 'the Other', here, simply refers to a
member of another culture. As I have tried to show above, however,
cultural fundamentalism simply does not survive a meeting with modern
cosmopolitanized reality, and as a result, this concept of the Other is
ill-defined. Naturally, I am not the first to make such an observation.
Ulrich Beck (2012) understands cosmopolitization as leading to the
erasure of the Other: "The age of cosmopolitization stands for a world
that for better or worse we all share, a world that has 'no outside',
'no exit', 'no other' any more" (Beck, 2012, p. 9). Others, such as
Pratap Bhanu Mehta, have argued that cosmopolitanism, as a stance,
entails a willingness to engage with the Other (Mehta, 2000). I take a
third view of the matter: while these scholars appreciate the fluidity
of global flows that have, eventually, given rise to the current
cosmopolitan age, they have failed to ascribe a similar fluidity to
their conceptualizations of the Other. In my view, the kinds of nested
identifications which I described in the previous section have led to a
state of the world in which the very concept of the singular 'Other' has
little value. Instead, I argue that Otherness is to be conceptually
deconstructed. Specifically, I argue three things:

1)  'Otherness' is not dichotomous, but continuous. My next-door
    neighbors are much less 'Other' to me than an Indian rice farmer,
    and yet they are both 'Others'.

2)  'Otherness' is dynamic and situation-dependent. After spending a
    summer working on an Indian rice farm, an Indian rice farmer may be
    far less 'Other' to me than my next-door neighbor.

3)  'Otherness' is strategically pliable, because identity is
    strategically pliable. One can choose to emphasize particular
    allegiances at particular moments, which has consequences for one's
    relations of 'Otherness'.

Thus, the erection of a national border does not simply create a single,
unified 'Other', diametrically opposed to 'us' or 'our culture'. Neither
has our cosmopolitanized world led to a radical homogeneity and
eradicated all distinction. Instead, our nested alliances ---Basque
Countries, Spain, EU --- have effected a state of affairs in which each
social situation and global engagement demands from us a re-examination
of exactly how and to what extent another individual is 'Othered' from
us.

What does this imply for cultural fundamentalism? In my view, it
inscribes cultural fundamentalism with an element of naïveté. A central
tenet of cultural fundamentalism is its essentialist nature, positing
the existence of a homogenous 'home' culture existing in opposition to
well-defined 'Others'. Cultural fundamentalism fails to recognize the
coercive and inevitable nature of cosmopolitization that has emerged as
a result of increasing global flows of information, technology, and
ideology, and the ways in which these flows have led to a nested array
of geopolitical associations.

Conclusion
==========

In this essay, I have argued that borders are a fundamental constituent
of identity, but the proliferation of borders at each and every level
have led to what I term 'nested identification': group identifications,
made possible through borders, intersect and overlap in various ways,
which do not necessarily adhere to an orderly schematism of 'us' vs.
'them'. Isomorphically, I argue that the notion of 'the Other', often
uncritically used as a starting point for analysis, is needlessly
dichotomous. Social scientists would do well to adopt a more nuanced
concept of 'the Other', as 'Otherness' is a spectrum, varies per
situation, and can be strategic in nature.

Bibliography
============

Appadurai, A. (1990). Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural
Economy. *Theory, Culture \\& Society*, *7*(2--3), 295--310.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/02632769000700201>

Beck, U. (2002). The cosmopolitan society and its enemies. *Theory,
Culture & Society*, *19*(1-2), 17--44.
https://doi.org/10.1177/026327640201900101

Calle, L. de la, & Sánchez-Cuenca, I. (2009). The end of three decades
of nationalist rule: The 2009 regional elections in the basque country.
*South European Society and Politics*, *14*(2), 211--226.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13608740903037992>

CDA. (2021). *Waarden*.
https://www.cda.nl/visie-en-metagroepen/metagroepen/waarden

Centraal Bureau van de Statistiek. (2020). *Jaarrapport Integratie
2020*.

Filibi Lopez, Igor, & Ibarra, Pedro. 2006. Regions, Minorities and
European Integration: A Case Study on the Basque Nation in Spain.
EUROREG case study report. Bilbao: University of the Basque Country.

Held, D. (2002) 'Cosmopolitanism: ideas, realities and deficits', in D.
Held and A. McGrew (eds.) *Governing globalization: power, authority and
global governance*. Cambridge: Polity, pp. 305-24.

Interreg. (2019). *Basque plans in action*.
https://www.interregeurope.eu/bid-rex/news/news-article/7322/basque-plans-in-action/

Jeram, S. (2013). Immigrants and the basque nation: Diversity as a new
marker of identity. *Ethnic and Racial Studies*, *36*(11), 1770--1788.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/01419870.2012.664281>

Llera, F. J., Leonisio, R., & Castaños, S. P. (2017). The influence of
the elites' discourse in political attitudes: evidence from the Basque
Country. *National Identities*, *19*(4), 367--393.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14608944.2016.1177006

Mansvelt Beck, J. (2008). Has the basque borderland become more basque
after opening the franco-spanish border? *National Identities*, *10*(4),
373--388. <https://doi.org/10.1080/14608940802518914>

Mehta, P. B. (2000). Cosmopolitanism and the Circle of Reason.
*Political Theory*, *28*(5), 619--639.
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/192291>

Ministerio del Interior. (2010). *Víctimas de ETA*.
https://web.archive.org/web/20100915224606/http://www.mir.es/DGRIS/Terrorismo_de_ETA/ultimas_victimas/p12b-esp.htm

Reinke de Buitrago, S. (2017). The meaning of borders for national
identity and state authority. In N. Günay Cengizand Witjes (Ed.),
*Border politics: Defining spaces of governance and forms of
transgressions* (pp. 143--158). Springer International Publishing.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46855-6_9>

Rumford, C. (2008). *Europe's cosmopolitan borders* (C. Rumford, Ed.;
pp. 52--68). Routledge.

Stolcke, V. (1995a). Talking culture: New boundaries, new rhetorics of
exclusion in europe. *Current Anthropology*, *36*(1), 1--24.
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2744220>

The Statute of Autonomy of the Basque Country. (1979).
http://www.basquecountry.eus/contenidos/informacion/estatuto_guernica/en_455/adjuntos/estatu_i.pdf

Vigh, H. (2009). Motion squared: A second look at the concept of social
navigation. *Anthropological Theory*, *9*(4), 419--438.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1463499609356044
